# Milestone 4 - Reflection

Our current dashboard titled, "HISTORICAL ANALYSIS OF WILDFIRES IN THE UNITED STATES" is the most up-to-date and final version of our dashboard project, which includes all the functionalities present in our initial planning, as well as several additional improvements.

The left-hand side of our dashboard is persistent across both of our two pages (titled "Wildfire Overview" and "Wildfire Causes") which contain sliders and dropdown menus which function to control various aspects of the visualizations on the entire dashboard. The slider functions to select the year (1992 - 2009), the first dropdown is for selecting the American state (such as "California") and the second dropdown is for selecting the fire size classification (ranging from A-G, increasing in severity).

The first page, "Wildfire Overview", focuses on providing a comprehensive overview of historical American wildfires, offering insights into the frequency (count of wildfires), severity (acres damaged), and distribution of wildfires across different American states and over the outlined time period. Plots here include a choropleth colour-coded by state, a bar chart detailing the Top 10 most damaged states, and two area plots colour-coded by fire class, visualizing fire frequency and acres damaged, respectively.

The second page, "Wildfire Causes", focuses its analysis on the various causes of wildfires, then applies that lens to their frequency and severity by geographical and temporal metrics. We decided to classify the causes into two main groups: "human-caused" and "lightning-caused", to make comparisons about monthly frequency by American regions, visualized using a heatmap and a layered line plot. Finally, total acres burned for both Causes groups and regional areas are expressed by two stacked bar plots.

Although we are all very happy with the final product of our dashboard, we are aware that there is always room to improve. First, there is slight misalignment of the plots on the "Wildfire Causes" page, which is a small enough concern that we opted to de-prioritize this issue. Second, despite using a layout to define a grid with rows and columns within the CSS file, we encountered difficulties regarding the spacing in between plots. We suspect that this issue is related to implementing the Altair visualization library into our (mainly plotly-based) dashboard, but we are not certain. Then, we attempted to modify the filter to remove the 'All' option when the user selects another option from the list. However, we were unable to accomplish this.
